\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c  This document is part of the Liza Data Collection Framework manual.
@c  Copyright (C) 2014 R-T Specialty, LLC.
@c
@c    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
@c    or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c    with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
@c    Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
@c    Free Documentation License''.

@c %**start of header
@include config.texi
@include version.texi
@include macros.texi

@c Developer Notes index (used only if DEVNOTES)
@defindex dn

@setfilename liza.info
@settitle Liza Data Collection Framework v@value{VERSION}

@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for the Liza Data Collection Framework, version
@value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2014, 2017 R-T Specialty, LLC.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation

@end copying


@titlepage
@title Liza Data Collection Framework v@value{VERSION}
@subtitle User & Developer Manual
@author R-T Specialty, LLC.

@c  Start copyright page
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@devnotice{
  This manual contains inline notes for developers of Liza.@footnote{
    To disable for user documentation, pass @option{--disable-devnotes}
      to @command{configure}.}
  For an index of notes@comma{} see @ref{Developer Notes Index}.}

@ifclear SRCURI
@devnotice{
  Location of Liza source code is unknown.
  Source cross-references have been disabled.@footnote{
      To enable source code cross-references, provide the URI to the
        root (as you want it to be seen in the manual) via
        @option{--with-srcuri=<uri>} to @command{configure}.}}
@end ifclear

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Main
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Design and Architecture:Design.  Design and structure of framework
* Assertions::
* Bucket::
* Client::
* Data API::
* Predicate System::
* Program::
* Server::
* Validation::
* License::                        Document License
* Concept Index::
@ifset DEVNOTES
* Developer Notes Index::  Index of pertenant notes for developers of Liza.
@end ifset
@end menu

@ifnottex

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@include design.texi
@include assert.texi
@include bucket.texi
@include client.texi
@include dapi.texi
@include pred.texi
@include program.texi
@include server.texi
@include validation.texi
@include license.texi

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@ifset DEVNOTES
  @node Developer Notes Index
  @unnumbered Developer Notes Index
  @printindex dn
@end ifset


@bye
